I'm struggling a bit to come up with the best name for this piece.  I like e-village, but it is not really correct.  The piece focuses on the cross-pollination between groups of people.  It is about the ecosystem of ideas, paradigms, memes.  Building bridges between diverse interests.  The benefit of an outsider to stir things up when the group is stuck in a limited space of concepts, strategies, beliefs.  It is about how creativity and humor both make unlikely or crazy leaps across a chasm with no footholds for rational steps.  It is a playful game of words and ideas.  I know the right name is in there somewhere...

Another idea that just occurred to me is that I would not propose for this contest, but I would put away for another installation later.  When I was a kid my family had two phone lines (since I was using the phone too much to connect to the internet (110 baud model 33 teletype, the arpanet only had a few dozen computers back then).  I used to make prank phone calls by calling one person on one line and another on the other and then hooking them together with a little box I built.  I would just listen as these two people would try to first resolve the question of who called whom, and then tried to figure out why they would be talking to each other.  Sometimes I'd choose competitors in the yellow pages, or if I was really daring (and the most fun by far) to connect two telco operators together.  Maybe to really get cross-pollination, you could have an installation that connected random (or carefully selected based on the social graph) people via some social network technology.  The audience of the work could sit back and see what happens.  Or the audience could suggest different groups they would like to see interact.  Since this isn't a prank, the installation could contract people from both groups until it finds two who would agree to interact in public. If it were using instant messaging, then it would be really cool to see 3 or 4 of these conversations simultaneously, and started at the same time.  You could see if there was parallelism between these independent conversations between the same two groups.

Yet another idea.  This piece suggests a cooperative game where the goal is to put words together to make ideas.  Players can say words that would be directed at each other.  The words would collide and annihilate each other if they were opposites or unrelated, or they would glom together if there was a concept that connected them.  Words in a cluster could rearrange themselves and add new words and pictures.  The goal would be to make the biggest, and/or prettiest, and/or most interesting word/picture glom.

I know that my creative process looks like it is all over the place, which it is.  It usually takes me a while to focus on one idea, and if it is a really good idea it will often have babies.  I just want to reassure the judges that I have completed many public installations on schedule and on budget, and they have worked reliably.  Two have been commissioned works, with budgets of $30k and $80k.  One of these was permanently installed in 2008 and has been running with minimal down time since then.  It can be viewed at the Children’s Inn on the NIH campus. The other was commissioned by the DC government and was installed in a café in downtown DC for several months, and then later at the Artomatic show.  A couple of other installations have been shown in galleries in DC and Maryland.  I have a CV and some documentation on several previous installations available on request.  

